"Here endeth" much more loudly than I'd meant.
"Hush, Tom! never mind it, for when your head's bare,
'Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
'One morn I miss'd him on the custom'd hill,
'The next with dirges due in sad array
'There at the foot of yonder nodding beech
A few cathedrals chronically on show,
A hunger in himself to be more serious,
A mourning or a funeral;
A place of thought where we in waiting lie;
A presence which is not to be put by;
A purpose more obscure. I wonder who
A serious house on serious earth it is,
A shape less recognizable each week,
A single field which I have look'd upon,
A six years' darling of a pigmy size!
A timely utterance gave that thought relief,
A wedding or a festival,
About the happy yard and singing as the farm was home,
About the lilting house and happy as the grass was green,
Advised night see walking a dead one?
All the moon long I heard, blessed among stables, the nightjars
All the sun long it was running, it was lovely, the hay
Along the cool sequester'd vale of life
Along the heath, and near his favourite tree;
And a tense, musty, unignorable silence,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
And all the earth is gay;
And always end much at a loss like this,
And as I was green and carefree, famous among the barns
And by came an Angel who had a bright key,
And by the vision splendid
And cometh from afar:
And custom lie upon thee with a weight,
And death, and thoughts of these—for whom was built
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds:
And fade into the light of common day.
And fire green as grass.
And froze the genial current of the soul.
And give us all your pleasures!
And got with our bags & our brushes to work.
And gravitating with it to this ground,
And green and golden I was huntsman and herdsman, the calves
And he opened the coffins & set them all free;
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.
And honoured among foxes and pheasants by the gay house
And honoured among wagons I was prince of the apple towns
And I again am strong:
And I have leave to go of her goodness,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
And let the rest rent-free to rain and sheep.
And let the young lambs bound
And little books; sprawlings of flowers, cut
And lovely is the rose;
And many a holy text around she strews,
And my father sold me while yet my tongue
And my old mother’s black.
and my soul like a bird that can fly. 
And nightly under the simple stars
And no unworthy aim,
And not in utter nakedness,
And nothing I cared, at my sky blue trades, that time allows
And now I wish her well.
And O ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves,
And once below a time I lordly had the trees and leaves
And playing, lovely and watery
And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
And see the children sport upon the shore,
And she also, to use newfangleness.
And she me caught in her arms long and small;
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,
And so he was quiet, & that very night,
And so Tom awoke; and we rose in the dark
And softly said, “Dear heart, how like you this?”
And that imperial palace whence he came.
And that much never can be obsolete,
And the Angel told Tom, if he'd be a good boy,
And the babe leaps up on his mother's arm:—
And the children are culling
And the dish ran away with the spoon.
And the sabbath rang slowly
And the sun grew round that very day.
And then to awake, and the farm, like a wanderer white
And this hath now his heart,
And unto this he frames his song:
And wake to the farm forever fled from the childless land.
And wash in a river and shine in the Sun.
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
And what remains when disbelief has gone?
And while the young lambs bound
And wished she were in hell,
And with new joy and pride
And with the heart of May
And, even with something of a mother's mind,
Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
Another church: matting, seats, and stone,
Another race hath been, and other palms are won.
any more voices nor weeping prayers 
Apparell'd in celestial light,
Approach and read (for thou canst read) the lay
Are beautiful and fair;
Are recognised, and robed as destinies.
Are summer's special treasures;
Are yet a master-light of all our seeing;
Are yet the fountain-light of all our day,
As I rode to sleep the owls were bearing the farm away,
As if his whole vocation
As to the tabor's sound!
As to the tabor's sound,
As Tom was a-sleeping he had such a sight!
at high sea and facing the sky, 
At length the Man perceives it die away,
At the beach or pool.
Awaits alike th' inevitable hour:—
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Be now for ever taken from my sight,
Before the children green and golden
Behold the Child among his new-born blisses,
Beholds the light, and whence it flows,
Being neither white nor black?
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Blank misgivings of a Creature
Bored, uninformed, knowing the ghostly silt
Both of them speak of something that is gone:
Brewed God knows how long. Hatless, I take off
Broods like the Day, a master o'er a slave,
Brushing with hasty steps the dews away,
Busily seeking with a continual change.
But all is turned thorough my gentleness
But for those first affections,
But for those obstinate questionings
But he
But it will not be long
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
But since that I so kindly am served
But superstition, like belief, must die,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
But yet I know, where'er I go,
By night or day,
Camping and fishing gear,
Can Honour's voice provoke the silent dust,
Can in a moment travel thither,
Can storied urn or animated bust
Can utterly abolish or destroy!
Chill Penury repress'd their noble rage,
Cleaned or restored? Someone would know: I don't.
Could scarcely cry " 'weep! 'weep! 'weep! 'weep!"
Delight and liberty, the simple creed
Did tremble like a guilty thing surprised:
Dispersed, yet tending to this cross of ground
Do take a sober colouring from an eye
Dost in these lines their artless tale relate;
Doth every beast keep holiday;—
Doth the same tale repeat:
Down the rivers of the windfall light.
E'en from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
E'en in our ashes live their wonted fires.
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
Earth fills her lap with pleasures of her own;
Ere this be thrown aside,
Even more than when I tripp'd lightly as they;
Fallings from us, vanishings;
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Feel the gladness of the May!
Fields high as the house, the tunes from the chimneys, it was air
Filling from time to time his 'humorous stage'
Flashing into the dark.
fleeting time removes the gentle crown, 
Flying with the ricks, and the horses
Follow him out of grace,
For lots of fun outdoors;
For Sunday, brownish now; some brass and stuff
For that which is most worthy to be blest—
For thee, who, mindful of th' unhonour'd dead,
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
Forbad to wade through slaughter to a throne,
Forebode not any severing of our loves!
Forget the glories he hath known,
Free from teacher's rule,
Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,
Fretted by sallies of his mother's kisses,
From God, who is our home:
From where I stand, the roof looks almost new—
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
Full soon thy soul shall have her earthly freight,
Give themselves up to jollity,
Golden in the heydays of his eyes,
Golden in the mercy of his means,
Grass, weedy pavement, brambles, buttress, sky,
Graved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.'
Hands, that the rod of empire might have sway'd,
Haply some hoary-headed swain may say,
Hath had elsewhere its setting,
Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,—
He sees it in his joy;
He'd have God for his father & never want joy.
Head to toe in suntan lotion,
Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!
Hectoring large-scale verses, and pronounce
hen my mother died I was very young,
Hence in a season of calm weather
Hey, diddle, diddle!
High instincts before which our mortal Nature
His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
How bow'd the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
I can't wait to see you;
I have seen them gentle, tame, and meek,
I hear the echoes through the mountains throng,
I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!
I love the brooks which down their channels fret,
I miss you in the morning;
I miss you late at night.
I only have relinquish'd one delight
I ran my heedless ways,
I should hear him fly with the high fields
I sign the book, donate an Irish sixpence,
I step inside, letting the door thud shut.
I take my curses back.
I want to die as the day declines, 
I wonder where I’m gonna die,
I would fain know what she hath deserved.
If chance, by lonely contemplation led,
If ever I cursed my black old mother
If ever I cursed my white old man
If Memory o'er their tomb no trophies raise,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
In a thousand valleys far and wide,
In all his tuneful turning so few and such morning songs
In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave;
In games, in riddles, seemingly at random;
In the faith that looks through death,
In the first, spinning place, the spellbound horses walking warm
In the moon that is always rising,
In the pebbles of the holy streams.
In the primal sympathy
In the soothing thoughts that spring
In the sun born over and over,
In the sun that is young once only,
In thin array after a pleasant guise,
In whose blent air all our compulsions meet,
In years that bring the philosophic mind.
Inflatable rafts on which to float,
Into a strange fashion of forsaking;
Is but a lonely bed without the sense or sight
Is lovely yet;
Is my joy and my delight.
Is on his way attended;
Is something that doth live,
It is not now as it hath been of yore;—
It pleases me to stand in silence here;
It was no dream: I lay broad waking.
its golden network from the green waves 
I’m sorry for that evil wish
Just to think about you
Kids in constant summer motion,
Land and sea
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Let not Ambition mock their useful toil,
Look round her when the heavens are bare;
Mighty prophet! Seer blest!
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Mounting the lectern, I peruse a few
Move forward, run my hand around the font.
Moving about in worlds not realized,
Must travel, still is Nature's priest,
Muttering his wayward fancies he would rove;
My cycle-clips in awkward reverence,
My head hath its coronal,
My heart is at your festival,
My ma died in a shack.
My old man died in a fine big house.
My old man’s a white old man
My wishes raced through the house high hay
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
No more shall grief of mine the season wrong;
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
Nor Man nor Boy,
Nor that riding to sleep
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he;
Nor you, ye Proud, impute to these the fault
Not for these I raise
Not in entire forgetfulness,
Nothing I cared, in the lamb white days, that time would take me
Now as I was young and easy under the apple boughs
Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song,
O evil day! if I were sullen
O joy! that in our embers
Of childhood, whether busy or at rest,
Of day or the warm light,
Of gown-and-bands and organ-pipes and myrrh?
Of heaven-born freedom on thy being's height,
Of sense and outward things,
Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower;
Of such as, wandering near her secret bower,
Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake,
Oft did the harvest to their sickle yield,
Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
Oh as I was young and easy in the mercy of his means,
Oh summer, summer, linger long,
On every side,
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
On to the fields of praise.
On whom those truths do rest,
once alone with sky and sea, 
Once I am sure there's nothing going on
Only in separation—marriage, and birth,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care:
Or Christmas-addict, counting on a whiff
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share,
Or crazed with care, or cross'd in hopeless love.
Or Flattery soothe the dull cold ear of Death?
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre:
Or will he be my representative,
Or, after dark, will dubious women come
Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
Our noisy years seem moments in the being
Our souls have sight of that immortal sea
Out of human suffering;
Out of the whinnying green stable
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Perpetual benediction: not indeed
Pick simples for a cancer; or on some
Please hurry and come back.
Power of some sort or other will go on
Reflect the place was not worth stopping for.
Rich with the spoils of time, did ne'er unroll;
Rowing or sailing or waterski boat,
Sang to my horn, the foxes on the hills barked clear and cold,
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
See, at his feet, some little plan or chart,
See, where 'mid work of his own hand he lies,
Shades of the prison-house begin to close
Shall we avoid them as unlucky places?
Shaped by himself with newly-learnèd art;
Shining, it was Adam and maiden,
Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!
Since someone will forever be surprising
Slow through the church-way path we saw him borne,—
So if all do their duty, they need not fear harm.
So it must have been after the birth of the simple light
So long and equably what since is found
So your chimneys I sweep & in soot I sleep.
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.
Some fragment from his dream of human life,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,—
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Some ruin-bibber, randy for antique,
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
something very luminous that fades. 
Strength in what remains behind;
Sunshine beaming golden heat
Tell us summer's here.
Th' applause of list'ning senates to command,
than the majestic beating of the waves. 
Thanked be fortune it hath been otherwise
Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears,
Thanks to the human heart by which we live,
That curled like a lamb's back, was shaved, so I said,
That hath kept watch o'er man's mortality;
That Life brings with her in her equipage;
That nature yet remembers
That now are wild and do not remember
That sometime they put themself in danger
That tap and jot and know what rood-lofts were?
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
That there hath pass'd away a glory from the earth.
That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned, & Jack,
That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high.
That, deaf and silent, read'st the eternal deep,
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The cat and the fiddle,
The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep;
The clouds that gather round the setting sun
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
The cow jumped over the moon;
The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear:
The earth, and every common sight,
The echoes snigger briefly. Back at the door
The fulness of your bliss, I feel—I feel it all.
The glory and the freshness of a dream.
The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee;
The homely nurse doth all she can
The innocent brightness of a new-born Day
The little actor cons another part;
The little dog laughed
The little tyrant of his fields withstood,
The lowing herd winds slowly o'er the lea,
The moon doth with delight
The moping owl does to the moon complain
The night above the dingle starry,
The pansy at my feet
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
The place of fame and elegy supply:
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
The rainbow comes and goes,
The rude Forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The short and simple annals of the Poor.
The sky gathered again
The song of thanks and praise;
The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star,
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
The sunshine is a glorious birth;
The swallow twittering from the straw-built shed,
The things which I have seen I now can see no more.
The thought of our past years in me doth breed
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
The winds come to me from the fields of sleep,
The years to bring the inevitable yoke,
The Youth, who daily farther from the east
Their furrow oft the stubborn glebe has broke;
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Their lot forbad: nor circumscribed alone
Their name, their years, spelt by th' unletter'd Muse,
Their parchment, plate, and pyx in locked cases,
Their sober wishes never learn'd to stray;
Then down a green plain, leaping, laughing they run,
Then naked & white, all their bags left behind,
Then sing, ye birds, sing, sing a joyous song!
Then will he fit his tongue
There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream,
There's little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head
Therewithall sweetly did me kiss
They flee from me that sometime did me seek
They kept the noiseless tenour of their way.
They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind.
Things we can't do the rest of the year
This place for what it was; one of the crew
This pleasing anxious being e'er resign'd,
This special shell? For, though I've no idea
This sweet May-morning,
Those shadowy recollections,
Thou best philosopher, who yet dost keep
Thou Child of Joy,
Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might
Thou, over whom thy Immortality
Thou, whose exterior semblance doth belie
Though I sang in my chains like the sea.
Though inland far we be,
Though nothing can bring back the hour
Though the morning was cold, Tom was happy & warm;
though we know with our hearts that she lies. 
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.
Through suburb scrub because it held unspilt
Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?
Thy heritage, thou eye among the blind,
Thy soul's immensity;
Time held me green and dying
Time let me hail and climb
Time let me play and be
to be like the sun that slowly expires; 
To dialogues of business, love, or strife;
To die when the sad light retires 
To die, and die young, before 
To hear not, at this last moment, 
To live beneath your more habitual sway.
To make her foster-child, her Inmate Man,
To make their children touch a particular stone;
To me alone there came a thought of grief:
To me did seem
To me the meanest flower that blows can give
To meet the sun upon the upland lawn;
To mountains, plains and shores.
To perish never:
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
To scatter plenty o'er a smiling land,
To see such sport,
To take bread at my hand; and now they range,
To whom the grave
Trail with daisies and barley
Turn wheresoe'er I may,
Twenty times better; but once in special,
Under the new made clouds and happy as the heart was long,
Up at the holy end; the small neat organ;
Up to the swallow thronged loft by the shadow of my hand,
Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make
Upon the growing Boy,
Vacations, for a sweet retreat
Waters on a starry night
We in thought will join your throng,
We will grieve not, rather find
Were all of them locked up in coffins of black;
Were endless imitation.
What this accoutred frowsty barn is worth,
What though the radiance which was once so bright
What was so fugitive!
What we shall turn them into, if we shall keep
When churches fall completely out of use
When her loose gown from her shoulders did fall,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Where is it now, the glory and the dream?
Where through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault
Which brought us hither,
Which having been must ever be;
Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour,
Which we are toiling all our lives to find,
Which, be they what they may,
Which, he once heard, was proper to grow wise in,
while agony seems like a dream 
While Earth herself is adorning,
while life still says: "I'm yours" 
Whither is fled the visionary gleam?
Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke
Will be the last, the very last, to seek
With all the Persons, down to palsied Age,
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
With light upon him from his father's eyes!
With naked foot, stalking in my chamber.
With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:—
With the dew, come back, the cock on his shoulder: it was all
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture deck'd,
Wondering what to look for; wondering, too,
Ye blessèd creatures, I have heard the call
Ye that pipe and ye that play,
Ye that through your hearts to-day
Ye to each other make; I see
Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind,
Yet e'en these bones from insult to protect
Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;
Yet stop I did: in fact I often do,
You always make me happy;
You have that special knack!
You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair."
—But there's a tree, of many, one,